COMPSCI 250 Syllabus, Fall 2025
COMPSCI 250 Syllabus, Fall 2025
This is the home page for COMPSCI 250.
COMPSCI 250 is the undergraduate core course in
discrete mathematics and will deal with logic, elementary number theory,
proof by induction, recursion on trees, search algorithms, 
finite state machines, and a bit of computability.
The two lectures each day will be very similar and use
very similar lecture slides.  Lecture 250-01 (Dave) meets MWF 1:25-2:15
p.m. in Goessmann 64.
Lecture 250-02 (Mordecai) meets MWF 10:10-11:00
a.m., in Goessmann 20.  The sections will have the same homework and exams, and will use
a single Canvas site.
There are eight discussion sections each Wednesday:
250-01AB, 10:10-1100 a.m., Marston 220
250-01AC, 11:15 a.m.-12:05 p.m., Marston 220
250-01AD, 12:20 p.m.-1:10 p.m., Marston 220
250-01AE, 4:00-4:50 p.m., Marston 211
250-02AB, 11:15 a.m.-12:05 p.m., ELAB 325
250-02AC, 1:25-2:15 p.m., Marston 220
250-02AD, 2:30-3:20 p.m., Skinner 12
250-02AE, 1:25-2:15, Marston 15
David Mix Barrington
, 210 Computer Science
  Building, 545-4329, private zoom number 459 532 6175, office hours
  for Fall 2025:
TBA
TBA
Mordecai Golin
,
A143 LGRC, office hours for Fall 2025: TBA
The best way to contact either
Dave
or
Mordecai
is by email.
  Dave will usually eventually answer email at barring@umass.edu, but not as
  quickly.
TA and UCA Information:
All TA office hours are in LGRT 220 except when announced
    otherwise -- check the Canvas page as these may change.
TA
Takuto Ban
, 
    office hours TBA
TA
Jackson Bibbens
, 
    office hours TBA
TA
Carter Luck
, office 
  hours TBA
TA
Ayesha Mostofa
, 
  office hours TBA
TA
Cooper Sigrist
, 
   office hours TBA
Head UCA
Henry Yang
,
    office hours TBA
Head UCA
Joud Zamzami
, office hours TBA
UCA's
Alex Barlow, Xingyu Cai, Pelin Egriboyun, Gianna Leidich, Om Mehta, 
Venkataraman Varatharajan
UCA office hours: TBD
This course is primarily intended for undergraduates in computer science 
and related majors such as informatics, mathematics or computer
  engineering.
  CICS 160
(using data structures) and MATH 132 (Calculus II) are prerequisites
and are pretty strictly enforced.
The
schedule
below indicates which
  lectures and discussions happen which days, which sections of the
  book to which they refer, and when the homework assignments are due.
There is one discussion meeting per week for each of the nine
sections, at various times on Fridays before lecture as indicated on
  SPIRE.
 Each discussion will have a written assignment which you
will carry out in groups.
Discussion attendance is required,
so that missing a discussion
  will incur a grade penalty. The TA's and instructors will cover the sections
  in various
combinations, 
so they will be as interchangeable as we can make them.
The course is using the Canvas course
  management system and the Piazza system for student discussion.
  We will also use a free system called
ClassQuestion
, which replaces
  the iClicker system we used in prior years.  They will be used in grading only
  for classroom attendance.
  Basic information about the course will be on this
site, and specifics of the course will be off of the Canvas main page
once it is established.
Course Objectives:
This is a course about
mathematical proof
-- how and why to prove
things about the objects of digital computation.  In order to write
programs, you need to think clearly about them, and the techniques of
mathematical proof are an essential tool for that.  The single most
important tool is
mathematical induction
, which allows us to prove
statements about any system that is defined in terms of itself.  The
natural numbers are the most familar such system, but in computing we
create other structures by
recursive definition
, and process
them with
recursive algorithms
.  We show you recursion and
induction using a variety of systems that are used in actual computation.
Learning Outcomes:
This
page lists specific things that
might be asked on a final exam.
General Information:
This course is primarily intended for undergraduates in computer science 
and related majors such as informatics, mathematics or computer
  engineering.
  CICS 160
(using data structures) and MATH 132 (Calculus II) are prerequisites
and are pretty strictly enforced.
The four-credit course meets for three lecture meetings a week, Monday,
  Wednesday, and Friday.  Each discussion will meet some time on
  Wednesday.
  The locations and times for the class meetings are listed above.The
  two
  lectures will be similar and will follow the
  textbook pretty closely.  Both lecture sections of the course will have
  the same assignments, exams, and grade scale.
The
schedule
below indicates which
  lectures and discussions happen which days, which sections of the
  book to which they refer, and when the homework assignments are due.
There is one discussion meeting per week for each of the nine
sections, at various times on Wednesdays as indicated on
  SPIRE.
 Each discussion will have a written assignment which you
will carry out in groups.
Discussion attendance is required,
so that missing a discussion
  will incur a grade penalty. The TA's and instructors will cover the sections
  in various
combinations, 
so they will be as interchangeable as we can make them.
The textbook is the first edition of Dave's in-progress book,
A Mathematical Foundation for Computer Science
.  This
will be available as an e-book from
Kendall 
Hunt Publishing
, but do
not
buy the "Revised Preliminary Edition", as it will not include the
correct
assessment package.  The correct information should be up there soon.
Course Requirements and Grading
Your grade in COMPSCI 250 will be based on the following:
Midterm Exams (30%):
There will be two midterm exams each counting 15% of your grade, on
  Thursday 9 October and Monday 10 November, each 7-9 p.m.,
  in rooms to be decided.
We will write an exam intended
to be finished in an hour, and give you two hours to finish it.
(Over the years
students have accused Dave, at least, of overestimating what they
  ought to be able to finish in an hour.) We will provide a separate
  room with proctoring for extended time exams, for people with
  Disabilities Services accomodations, from 5-9.
  The
exams
from
  Fall 2024
and from other
semesters may be used as 
practice exams.
Final Exam (35%):
This will be during the May
final exam period
as scheduled by the University, and will be cumulative, though with greater 
emphasis on the last third of the course.  You will have two
hours.
The Spring 2025 250 final
(with solution
here
) may be used as a practice
exam.  The
learning goals page
for the
  course is essentially an outline of the tasks that might be asked
  for in the final exam.
Homework (20%):
There will be six
  homework assignments during the term, due at 11:59 pm on
  the following days, all on Fridays:
HW#1: Friday 19 September
HW#2: Friday 3 October
HW#3: Friday 17 October
HW#4: Friday 31 October
HW#5: Friday 21 November
HW#6: Tuesday 9 December
Together they will count for 20% of your final grade,
  with only the best five 
counting for 4% each. (The lowest grade will be dropped.)
Homework must be turned in as PDF files on the Gradescope site for the course.
This will allow the TA's to grade it and give you feedback without the 
necessity of moving large quantities of paper around.  PDF files may be 
generated in a variety of ways -- I would probably do it using Latex, but Word
and other word processing software has options to produce PDF's.  (On a Mac,
any print command has a "save PDF" option.)  You can also scan a handwritten 
document to produce a PDF which you can then turn in.  (But what you submit
must
be readable -- you are responsible for reviewing your PDF yourself
to see that it is.  Cel phone pictures of bad handwriting will in general not 
work.)
For full credit, homework must be submitted by the deadline.  Late
  homework
  will be accepted up to 24 hours after the deadline, with a 20%
  penalty unless (a) the penalty is waived for some reason or (b) this
  assignment is the best of your late homeworks.  Students with
  Disability
  Services accommodations may use the late day with no penalty.  Work
  after the late day will in general not be 
accepted -- we'll deal with valid excuses by giving "excused" grades on 
particular assignments.
Discussions (6%):
Attendance at the Friday discussion sections
is required and this portion of the course grade will be based on your 
attendance and participation.  Participation will be measured
by group responses to 
in-class writing assignments, usually based on "Excursion" sections of the 
text.  You will be divided randomly into groups of 2-4 people and each group
will hand in a response to the assignment.  These will be graded "check" (B)
or "check-plus" (A), and the best nine of your eleven
will count for 6% of your
  total grade. (There are ten in-class discussions and one more, an extra course
  evaluation to be submitted at the end of the term.)
Textbook Quizzes (6%):
These short
true-false
exercises will occur once a week, due at 11:59 pm every 
  Tuesday, except those with exams or spring break:
Quiz 1: 16 Sept (1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7)
Quiz 2: 23 Sept (1.8, 1.10, 2.1, 2.3, 2.5)
Quiz 3: 30 Sept (2.6, 2.8, 2.10, 2.11)
Quiz 4: 14 Oct (3.1, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 4.1)
Quiz 5: 21 Oct (4.3, 4.4, 4.7)
Quiz 6: 28 Oct (4.9. 4.11, 9.1, 9.3)
Quiz 7: 4 Nov (9.4, 9.5, 9.6)
Quiz 8: 18 Nov (9.8, 9.9, 9.10, 5.1, 5.2, 5.4, 5.5)
Quiz 9: 2 Dec (14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.5, 14.6, 14.7)
Quiz 10: 9 Dec (14.8, 14.10, 15.1, 15.6, 15.8)
They will cover the material of the previous 
week's lectures.  You will do them using the "assessment package" of
the
textbook, so you will need a current version of the textbook.  Some
small number of the quiz grades will be dropped -- the remainder will count for 6% of the
total grade.  A typical quiz will be 20 questions, with the grade being
  F for not doing it, C for half right (the expected result of guessing),
  and A for all right.
In-Class Questions (3%):
During most lectures there will be questions
to be answered on a free clicker app on your phone (see
this site
).  (This is
the only sense in which lecture attendance affects your grade.)  The
  first questions that count will be on Wednesday 7 February, the fourth
lecture, so that you should have time to arrange to get yourself
  registered
  on the app.
As we have had it lately,
only participation counts
for grading
  clicker scores.  There will be
no excused absences
for lecture
  attendance, but a large number of grades will be dropped.  There
  will
  be a total of about 72 in-class questions to be answered, and 54 or more
  will get full credit.
Calculation of Grades
My (Dave's) system for computing grades is a bit unusual, so I will try to
explain it here.  I take every graded component of the course and
assign it a number on a scale from F (0) through C (200) to A (400)
and sometimes higher.  These are the numbers that are averaged
together by Moodle to get your "course total" at the end of the term,
and this is the basis for your letter grade.  (For example, if your
course
total is 342, the closest letter grade to this is a B+ (333) so that's
what you get.  There is some provision for rounding up in close cases,
since a 345 is within five points of the boundary (350) between A- and
B+, I would give that an A-.  Please don't whine about the exact boundaries.
For exams and homeworks, there is thus both a raw score, typically
ranging from 0 to around 100, and a normalized score on the 0-400
scale.
The mapping from raw score to normalized score does
not
always
take
0 to 0.  A typical scale for a homework assignment takes 30 (and
lower) to 0, 45 to 100, 60 to 200, 75 to 300, 90 to 400, and higher
grades above 400 by the same linear function.  On each assignment, we
decide
after grading
what raw score constitutes a 200, and what score
a 400, then find the linear function that meets those two points.
Academic Honesty Policy
All work submitted must be your own
in presentation
.  How much
outside help is allowed depends on the course component.
The exams are 
closed-book and no outside help is allowed.
Any
cheating on an exam
is grounds for an F in the course.
With homework the rule is a bit harder to specify.
You
may
discuss homework with other students, in
fact we encourage this as a learning experience.  But again, the writeup must
be your work.  Copying is not allowed, and collaboration so close that it
looks like
copying is not allowed.  (In general, if we
get two identical
homeworks we will accept neither of them (i.e., both get F's)
and we will report this action to the Academic Honesty Board.)
  Remember to
tell us who you worked with
as well.
A good practice is to divide
your work into an "ideas phase" where you collaborate and a "writeup phase"
where you work alone -- enter the writeup phase with notes, but not written
solutions.
If you make use of a printed or on-line source for the homework, other
than specific course materials such as the textbook or web site, please
mention it in your writeup
.  Of course copying a solution to a problem from
the web, or from solutions given out in prior semesters, is cheating,
  and this is easier for us to detect than you might think.
You are free (and encouraged) to discuss answers to discussion and clicker questions, and
  to work together on quizzes.
Lastly, the University has noticed the existence of AI tools
  like ChatGPT, and the Academic Honesty Policy prohibits them unless
  an
  instructor explicit allows them.  We don't allow them here.  A major
  goal
  of this course is to develop your ability to present mathematical
  arguments, and we want to evaluate
your own
performance in
  that regard.
Academic Honesty Policy:
All work submitted must be your own
in presentation
.  How much
outside help is allowed depends on the course component.
The exams are 
closed-book and no outside help is allowed.
Any
cheating on an exam
is grounds for an F in the course.
With homework the rule is a bit harder to specify.
You
may
discuss homework with other students, in
fact we encourage this as a learning experience.  But again, the writeup must
be your work.  Copying is not allowed, and collaboration so close that it
looks like
copying is not allowed.  (In general, if we
get two identical
homeworks we will accept neither of them (i.e., both get F's)
and we will report this action to the Academic Honesty Board.)
  Remember to
tell us who you worked with
as well.
A good practice is to divide
your work into an "ideas phase" where you collaborate and a "writeup phase"
where you work alone -- enter the writeup phase with notes, but not written
solutions.
If you make use of a printed or on-line source for the homework, other
than specific course materials such as the textbook or web site, please
mention it in your writeup
.  Of course copying a solution to a problem from
the web, or from solutions given out in prior semesters, is cheating,
  and this is easier for us to detect than you might think.
You are free (and encouraged) to discuss answers to discussion and clicker questions, and
  to work together on Moodle quizzes.
Lastly, the University has noticed the existence of AI tools
  like ChatGPT, and the Academic Honesty Policy prohibits them unless
  an
  instructor explicit allows them.  We don't allow them here.  A major
  goal
  of this course is to develop your ability to present mathematical
  arguments, and we want to evaluate
your own
performance in
  that regard.
Accommodation Statement:
The University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing an equal educational
opportunity for all students. If you have a documented physical, psychological, or learning
disability on file with Disability Services (DS), you may be eligible for reasonable academic
accommodations to help you succeed in this course. If you have a documented disability that
requires an accommodation, please notify me within the first two weeks of the semester so that we can make appropriate arrangements. For more information, consult the Disability Services website at http://www.umass.edu/disability/.
Inclusivity Statement:
We celebrate the diversity in our community and actively seek to include and listen to voices that are often silenced in the computing world. We welcome all individuals regardless of age, background, citizenship, disability, sex, education, ethnicity, family status, gender, gender identity, geographical origin, language, military experience, political views, race, religion, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, and work experience.
Names and Pronouns:
Everyone has the right to be addressed by the name and pronouns that they use for themselves. You can indicate your preferred/chosen first name and pronouns on SPIRE, which appear on class rosters. I am committed to ensuring that I address you with your chosen name and pronouns. Please let me know what name and pronouns I should use for you if they are not on the roster. Please remember: A student’s chosen name and pronouns are to be respected at all times in the classroom.
Title IX Statement:
UMass is committed to fostering a safe learning environment by responding promptly and effectively to complaints of all kinds of sexual misconduct. If you have been the victim of sexual violence, gender discrimination, or sexual harassment, the university can provide you with a variety of support resources and accommodations
If you experience or witness sexual misconduct and wish to report the incident, please contact the UMass Amherst Equal Opportunity (EO) Office  (413-545-3464 | equalopportunity@admin.umass.edu) to request an intake meeting with EO staff. Members of the CICS community can also contact Erika Lynn Dawson Head, director of diversity and inclusive community development (erikahead@cics.umass.edu | 860-770-4770).
Learning Support:
Along with the staff and the textbook, there are additional support
resources for the course.
The
Learning Resource
  Center
, including
Mihn Do (mhdo@umass.edu)
,
  who leads Supplemental
  Instruction sessions for COMPSCI 250 this term.
The
Assistive
  Technology Center
Disability Services
Student Success
Center for Counseling
  and Psychological Health
English as a Second Language
  (ESL) Program
CMASS
  Success Coach Program
Single
  Stop Resources
Last modified 28 August 2025