Academics : Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences : UMass Amherst
Skip to main content
The University of Massachusetts Amherst
Academics
Learn with innovators and problem-solvers working together for the common good.
About
CICS is UMass Amherst's home for interdisciplinary computing education and research.
We offer top-ranked undergraduate and graduate programs. Through coursework and hands-on experience, you'll prepare to take on society's big problems. With a CICS education, you can go on to top graduate programs. Join—or found—cutting-edge startups or work with industry giants across sectors, from health care and finance to technology and the arts.
Overview links
Advising
Career Development
Academic Policies
Courses
Scholarships and Fellowships
No. 1
Public computer science program in the Northeast and in the top 25 among all public and private institutions in North America
88
Award-winning faculty
As of 2024
800+
Undergraduate and graduate degrees awarded
In 2024
170+
unique employers hire undergraduate students within 6 mo. of graduation
Class of 2023
Degrees
Undergraduate
BS or BA in Computer Science
Build a solid foundation in this dynamic field with a BS or BA in computer science.
BS in Informatics
This major combines a strong foundation in computing with a concentration in another field.
Minor in Computer Science
A minor in computer science allows you to get a solid background in computational thinking regardless of your chosen major.
Graduate
MS in Computer Science — Hybrid
Designed for students to start coursework online and complete the remainder on campus.
Graduate Certificate Programs
We offer two graduate-level certificates: Statistical and Computational Data Science and Information Security
PhD in Computer Science
Ranked among the top 25 programs in the U.S., our PhD program features world-renowned faculty, interdisciplinary research, and a spirit of collaboration.
MS in Computer Science — Online
This UMass Amherst online program allows you to earn your degree fully online while receiving the same rigorous education as our top-ranked in-person program.
MS in Computer Science — On Campus
UMass Amherst's innovative,
on-campus
degree program will help you build sought-after skills and knowledge for research or industry.
Accelerated Master's (4+1)
A five-year program that allows UMass Amherst computer science majors to obtain a BS and an MS in computer science in five years.
Advising
Our professional academic advisors will support you every step of the way — from registering for courses to determining degree requirements, we are here for you.
Learn More About Advising
Global footer
©2025
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Site policies
Privacy
Non-discrimination notice
Accessibility
Terms of use